---
talk_id: data-sketches-a-visualization-a-month
---

[Captioner waiting for audio].

... there's a progress bar I highlight in the individual - so the user can get an idea where the song is playing relative to the rest of the musical. Another example, a smaller example I want to show you is - visualisations, but I don't start the animations until the user scrolls down into the correct section so that no matter how quickly or slowly they scroll, they can always see the animation from start to beginning. It's these small attentions to detail to really make a piece for me because it tells the reader that we really care about their experience.
>> Even more examples of things you could do with the light:  on a flight back to Amsterdam, I decided to make - if it ever gets to the next page - there we go, right. I didn't have any Wi-Fi at 10,000 feet, so I couldn't do anything essential so I made an animated legend of my fantasy books for fun, or adding animated gifs of the most memorable and fun moments and having the most detailed information I had, turning the top-ten songs into tiny vinyls, have animations about weird and silly events of the Olympic Games, but still managing to win gold.
Although getting your data on the screen in such a manner as to make it insightful is key, it's the extra things to add like animations, annotations, gifs and more that will make it unique and special and more of a delight to investigate. Take some time to think about these aspects as well.
>> Finally would be we get to the source stuff, or the best stuff. We weren't expecting the kind of response we got when talking about the project. We thought if we could have fun and maybe learn some things, and if our friends enjoyed it, that would be enough and that would be really cool. Instead would be we got the most amazing feedback about our visualisations and the value of our write-ups, and we had the opportunities to meet some amazing credible people and talk to them, and even gain an unexpectedly great friendship out of all of this. But, when we really sat back to think about the transferrable lessons, the most important thing that we agreed on is that if you are about to embark on an ambitious project, grab someone to go along the ride with you because then you can motivate and support each other when things get tough!  Make sure that someone you grab, if you're not so responsible yourself, someone responsible so that you can keep each other accountable and relatively on track because you don't want to beat each other down.
Make sure that someone you grab is someone you really respect and hopefully the feeling is mutual. And you respect each other, but that most importantly, it is someone you trust, or can grow to trust, because that's absolutely essential to giving and receiving feedback. And finally, finally, we're if you're about to do something ambitious, make an individualisation from scratch every single month, know that it's going to be hard. We've been creatively drained. There's been months when we've been creatively drained and we didn't know how to go on. Remember, you learn as you struggle. The amount that we've learned, both personally and technically, have been absolutely amazing, and very much worth the time.
>> So, over the last ten months, we've learned to find data in the weirdest of places that you can sketch thinking areas that you can scope of with code. That SDP paths and math are amazing, and that surprisingly small things can add a sense of delight to your audience. We didn't set out to learn or be confronted by all these things, we set out to have fun and that we definitely succeeded. Sure, it has been tough. There were times when we were coding into the night when we would rather van sitting watching a video but it opened up new paths and opportunities that we weren't even looking for. We hope that you will join us for the final two months of data munging, sketching and quoting up our topics into fun and overly elaborate visualisations. Thank you very much. [Applause].
TIM:  How was that. Data sketch|es. Should have multi-speakers up more often!  Twice the fun.
