---
---

>> Hello and good morning, everyone. We are Polly, Kevin, and Kristina. We would love to welcome you to the fourth and yet biggest CSSconf EU 2017!  Welcome!  [Applause].
>> We need one more round of applause, because, as you might have noticed, there are three different faces up here than in past years. Our new organiser, Polly, did so much hard work, and all for the years of the - she's now a conference organiser. Give it up for Polly!  [Applause].
>> Thank you!
>> So, we have an amazing sponsor in Twilio. Thanks to them, you can order your coffee where you are, pick it up at the booth at the middle at the end of the hall.
>> We also have some sad news. Some of you might have read on Twitter last night our speaker Max Stoiber cannot make it today. He was supposed to talk about components, but, due to a family emergency, he can't come out. Max, if you see this later, we send our best wishes and hope that everything will be all right. [Applause]  Luckily, the co-creator of Nexus projects, Glen, is in the audience, and we promised you can be an attendee and enjoy the conference - sorry, Glen!  Glen spent most of yesterday and tonight to come up with a political replacement talk, and we are so, so grateful for that, so, please make sure to give him one of the biggest applauses later on when he improvises on stage and we're sure it will be fantastic. Thank you, Glen. [Applause].
>> Finally, we want to wish you obviously a great day. Please share it with us, and enjoy. Thank you. [Applause].
>> All right, we're done here. It is time to leave the stage and hand it over to people who are good at this. Our hosts for today will be Tim Holman and Jessica Lord. Welcome. [Applause].
TIM:  Hey!
JESSICA:  Hi!
TIM:  This is the enthusiasm that we bring to the table. Yes, do we have slides?  There we go. CSS  CSSconf, welcome!  I'm an Australian, floating around the scene for a little while. I'm super happy to be here and kind of get the energy going!
JESSICA:  I'm Jessica. I'm an American. I'm not in any scene, but I like floating. [Laughter] .
TIM:  Okay. So, CSSconf is so big, the big one ever. We found the family photos. We will take a family photo at the end of the day. I will show you the previous ones and you can see how much it is grown and what it has become. This is 2013.
JESSICA:  2014.
TIM:  2015, and you can see a lot of familiar faces in there. 2016, we didn't have one, but there was ...
JESSICA:  CSSconf Budapest wooh!
TIM:  CSSconf Argentina.
JESSICA:  CSSconf Nordic in Oslo.
TIM:  So 2017, we've got a few new things. We have childcare, which is incredible. Yes. We've got these babies are already more intelligent than I am, trust me!  So we have childcare, we are a quiet room as well, , live captioning. All of the talks will be live captioned in real time.
TIM:  I think my accent is not too bad. We can get that through there. We also have a code of conduct, of course, and the official kind of statement there is be excellent to each other. If you have any problems, reach out to us or any of the organisers and we will get that sorted.
JESSICA:  Okay, so, if you've been to other CSSconfs before, you might notice we are in a brand new venue this year, Arena Hall.  This is where you are in the city. This is where you are right now. This amazing building was built in 192/1928 and at the time, it was the largest free-span in all of Europe, and it was built to house buses for the transit company. I thought this was really cool because the bus was also the world's largest bus at the time - this is the 1927 double-decker, so they would fill this whole space with the buses and clean them and store all of the buses here.
TIM:  We've come a long way. I feel like it was built in 1927 in Australia, I would not want to be under the roof!  Considering it is German, it is going to be here for ever. Okay, so we have a tonne of good sponsors. You can see all of their booths out there. I advise checking it out. They've got all that going on.
JESSICA:  And we have a schedule today, it is not just us talking. We have some amazing speakers. It looks real lit, y'all. There will be two talks, coffee, then three talks, then lunch, then three talks, then coffee, then talks and then party!  You got it?  You can go to the website and check the schedule too, and keep up.
TIM:  At this point in the MC presentations, we looked through the previous ones, and there was Jed and Nick and a ton of CSS puns. I don't know if they were good, but whenever anybody says a pun you're like, "That was really good and I I can't use that now." We're done, they are kind of through. I wanted to do something different and we kind of discussed back and forth what we are going to do and we came up with something that we've called the "CSSconf party pack", trademark, patent pending!  So, so?
JESSICA:  So one of the amazing things about this event, about JSConf is the community, right?  There's so much going on. We really like being with everyone, but maybe you don't have a community. Maybe you work remotely and you really want that feeling.
TIM:  So, I don't know if anybody has kind of - knows me and has seen the things that I do, I kind of like this do this thing that I call "bad cop development" where you take a good thing and you make it bad, and you learn from it. I've been working from homing the last kind of couple of years, and one thing that I kind of missed is passive-aggressive office notes. This is whenever I find a note in my house, it is me to left it to me. Oh, you left the banana out - good one!  I wanted to bring this back into my life. I made a passive-aggressive office simulator Slack bot. It's very intelligent. It's well-fed with real live data. Don't forget the ergonomics lunch later on. Please don't take these forks home, they are for everyone. I have to buy forks every couple of years. It kind of remembers things as well so whoever left the yoghurt in the fridge, please remove it. You're sitting there, forget about it and looks like no-one removed the yoghurt!  Classic office life!  You can get it today. On my website!  [Applause]
JESSICA:  All right, so not only do we benefit from excellent German engineering in this amazing space, but we benefit from German design, and things like Bauhaus that are incorporated today in all types of design, typography, so what could be a really good way to tribute great German design?
TIM:  Everybody here really appreciates design. It is a big part of CSS. I'm in this mind set of bad-cop development. I've developed something called Smelvetica. Anyone with any sense is going to feel uncomfortable at the kerning in this Helvetica. You can install this and but this is what it looks like.
JESSICA:  Or on someone else's machine.
TIM:  The babies are crying, the children are screaming!  You can get it today!  You can download this. It is a really simple install. There are instructions. Get it on your friends' and everyone's machines. Smelvetica is the future!  [Applause].
JESSICA:  And so we also know that CSS has come a long way, and people have done amazing games, and animations, created animation libraries, and really great codepen examples of these silky-smooth animations. How can we do that?
TIM:  We have a lot of people who will talk about animation as well - super exciting - and I'm the party pooper. The party pack, I've created something I called obnoxious.css. It is, like, a take on Dan Eden's animation.css except the animations are very, very, very good. This one is called "shake it". Let's just wait it out ... . There's plenty of good ones. Intensifies. Really going to get your audience going, trust me!  Fontilicious. That one got some hate. I didn't know you could animate fonts until the other day. There might be some that cause epileptic fits so we will skip those out. Get it today!  And you can of course see all the party pack at the CSSconf party pack. Get it today!  So?
JESSICA:  Our first talk is from Ivana and she's going to tell us what being a CSS developer means and hopefully it means doing nothing that Tim has told you.
TIM:  I try.
JESSICA:  We are excited to be here and kick off this conference, so everyone give a warm welcome to Ivana!  [Applause].
